Featured below is a brief description of algorithms that I have written for the [Biological and Active Materials lab at McGill](http://bam.lab.mcgill.ca/) which is headed by Dr. Allen Ehrlicher.

# Image-Analysis for Biological Imaging
## Using classical AI to solve Traction Force Microscopy (TFM) problems
### Premise
This bioengineering technique lets us quantify cell forces based on how much cells deform the substrate they are attached to. When a cell contracts, it pulls on its substrate. In TFM, this substrate is a gel embedded with fluorescent beads that can be imaged at high resolutions. Therefore, images taken before and after a cell contracts will exhibit bead displacements. From the properties of the gel, we can then compute how much force was required to displace the beads by the amount they were displaced by the cell.
### Issues
Unfortunately, TFM is highly sensitive to a number of experimental and computational parameters that are hard to control. To reduce the costs of replicating experiments and to validate the accuracy of TFM analysis, simulations of TFM experiments have been designed. One such 3D simulation is described in [this paper by Peñas et al.](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261369299_Validation_tool_for_traction_force_microscopy), and it is particularly powerful in so far that it generates simulated images that replicate how beads are supposed to be displaced when a desired input force is applied to the gel the beads are contained in. As such, if an experimenter feeds the simulation an image of the fluorescent beads pre-contraction, then they can play around with the input force parameter that the simulation will virtually apply to the gel. From this point on, one can find the force parameter that will cause the same amount of bead displacement in the simulation as was found experimentally. Moreover, one could run TFM anaylsis on the simulated images to compare if the forces applied on the substrate experimentally are comparable to the forces applied in the simulation since both yield images with identical displacements.
### simulatedAnnealingTFM.m Algorithm
To aid in this validation step, I have written an algorithm that modifies the script written by Peñas et al. to find the optimal force input parameter that will give the same displacement values as a target displacement value obtained experimentally through TFM analysis. This algorithm is based on one of the classical AI algorithms called **Simmulated Annealing** which is a local search algorithm. Usage details are specified in the MATLAB script.
## Using Image Processing caveates to analyze Förster (or Fluorescence) Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) image data
### Premise
As it is used at the BAM lab at McGill, FRET imaging permits the localization and detection of interacting proteins or molecules. FRET sensors are special sensors that can be modified to fuse with specific proteins within a cell. When two sensors come in close physical proximity (e.g. they are basically bound to each other) they fluoresce. As such, FRET sensors can be fused to different proteins which are also fused together, so that whenever or wherever one is imaging the contents of a cell, the detection of fluorescence is an indicator of interaction between two proteins of interest. Further, the intensity of fluorescence is an indicator of the density of said interactions.
### Algorithms
As it stands, I have written a few algorithms that have facilitated the processing of data stored in FRET images. They have to do with determining the intensity of FRET ratio values stored in the image as a function of some other parameter such as distance from the cell leading edge, angular disposition relative to the center of the cell, or even distance from an arbitrary point on the cell border. These scripts all use clever segmentation and geometric tricks to divide an image into different regions of interest, and then harness MATLAB tools for intuitive visualizations of the data. For instance, the Concentric Circles script makes virtual rings around the leading edge of a cell by substracting the area within the circle of the previous sized ring from the circle of the current sized ring. Nevertheless, all these algorithms rely on some underlying assumption and therefore present their own respective limitations that must be taken into account. More details are provided on the individual scripts.
